July 19 (evening).
I come back from Europe after 4 week travel. I go the moor and notice a strange bird call.

July 20.
Same bird call. I notice a warbler and try to take a picture.

July 21-26.
I take more pictures and I try to identify the bird. All books I have, google and youtube provide confusing answers.

July 27.
I write to Ian Broadbent, the bird recorder for North-East Scotland, and ask for help. I send a picture and a description of the call. He suggests a Sedge Warbler or a Willow Warbler, although my description of the call does not fit the picture for neither of them.

July 28.
I manage to take better pictures and send them to Ian together with a record of the call. He thinks it may be a Reed or a Marsh Warbler. 

July 29.
Ian and his dad come to see the birds and they identify them as breeding Marsh Warblers. They inform local birders Ian and Roddy. Roddy visits in the afternoon.

Ian contacts Ian Francis from the Rare Breeding Birds Panel and they think it is 6th or 7th record in Scotland. 

I visit the birds in the evening, around 19:00. My presence does not bother them much. They don't produce the usual distressed call, Just the sharp 'tzak'. I see them on a few short occasions. No chance to take a picture, though.

July 30.

Morning: the birds active in the buddleia and alders. I saw two of them at the same time on one buddleia. They are exploring further afield: the whitebeams along the street, thistle next to my garden. I can even hear one just now from my kitchen.

I took some pictures of the birds on a buddleia. I seems that there were more than two at the same time but I can't be sure. Some of them look smaller and more scruffy (the picture when the bird raises its head).

Correction by Ian B.: The smaller fellow is a willow warbler. I removed the pictures.

Evening: I meet Ian. Birds not as noisy as on previous evenings. They fly between the gorse and buddleia. We see them form time to time, but there are no chances for a decent picture.

July 31.

Morning (before 7:00). The birds present on the usual buddleia and on the ground. Hard to see; just the movement of branches or grass plus the familiar call. I also heard one in the thistle near my garden and seen one on the cotoneaster (see latest pictures) in the corner of the gorse patch opposite to their nest.

August 1.

7:00 One bird on a buddleia. Relatively quiet, hard to see clearly in the bush.

8:00-8:30 One bird in the thistle in front of my bench. It was quiet and I noticed it only when I was 2 meters away. Moved deeper in the thistle and stay there for the next half hour. I stayed there just listening. It has various pitches and tones of the call. Sometimes muffled, sometimes more open. I decided to record it and when I was filming it perched on the top of a curly dock.

Late morning: Birds can be heard from the thistle next to our garden. My wife even suspects that they visited a tree or the hedge in our garden.

Noon: All quiet on the bird front. I went around the moor and there was only a short shy rattle from the thistle next to my garden.

August 2.

Morning. I managed to take a few nice pictures on a buddleia behind the hedged edge of my garden. When I go back home the birds come too close to the garden. They are in thistle in front of my bench most of the time and come to the hedge and even into the garden. I also noticed that they perch on too exposed places. I started chasing them away. 

Afternoon. Very quiet.

Evening. Relatively quiet. The marsh gave a short concert in the thistle during our dinner. Then a few short calls before 19:30 and that was it for tonight.

August 3.

Morning. Quiet. I heard 5 calls from the other side of the street. 9:00 Ian heard and saw them in the buddleia/alder; possibly two birds. 11:00 I heard and saw one. The behaviour very different from yesterday. No long sequences of rattling. Just a few short rattles or sharp 'tzak's.

Afternoon. Let me quote the whatsapp message I sent to Ian at 17:20: "Most of the afternoon was quiet. Half an hour ago I heard two distinct calls in the thistle. Just when I was approaching after a walk around the moor. However, at the same time I heard the bell of Mortka from inside the thistle and a noise of her strike. Małysz, who was listening to this from the bench got agitated as if Mortka caught something. I ran inside the thistle, found Mortka. She had no prey and there was no bird on the ground so I assume the hunt was unsuccessful. I caught her and took her home, feeling something like stinging nettle. When at home I realised it was wasps which got under my clothes. I think Mortka was stung too. Anyway, when I started undressing myself Mortka ran back to the thistle. She is back now with no signs of successful hunt and I saw one bird flying away. Yeah... Never a dull day..."

August 4.
Quiet. I heard a few calls and saw one bird flying into the nest. Ian saw and hear one bird too.

August 5.

Morning. Similar. A few shy calls. Ian saw the bird flying into my garden. Given the fact that they were already feeding the young on July 20 (I saw them with insects) and that the young get independent after 15-19 days it is possible that the young are already independent. There is also a change of behaviour in the sense that they are rarely seen close to the (presumed) nest and that they don't make rattling calls any more (the last one on August 3). It would be nice to confirm that some of the juveniles survived.




